---
title: "A Fishing Trip"
id: 33
slug: "a-fishing-trip"
hero:
  image: "/images/a-fishing-trip.jpg"
---


One day, when at my home, my youngest brother, Peder. suggested that he and I go a fishing. He was 2½ years younger than I, and we had grown up together until I went to sea. We borrowed our father's boat and went to Stavanger to secure some fresh herring for bait. And we called on my intended father-in-law, who loaned us a set of deep-sea lines and five witch-nets. Father also had some deep-sea lines, which we took along. We secured a full outfit of cooking utensils, as well as provisions for a couple of days. Then we betook us to Vignesholmene southwest from Finney. It was afternoon when we got there. The weather was exceptionally fine, with sunshine and mild air. We began by setting the deep-sea lines immediately. There must have been about 1200 fathoms of them; and we put out the five nets. As soon as we had put down the last we began to draw the first; and thus we continued till sunrise next morning. The night at this time of year was so light that we could well see how to handle our nets and lines, which were set here and there around the islands. And of fish, we caught various kinds, such as sea bass, blue fish, red fish, cod, deep sea grayfish, dog or tiger fish, salmon, trout and even lobsters. A seafowl was also caught in the witch-net. Those nets seemed to be fit to catch all kinds of fish, crabs and fowls. Of course, the latter was caught while diving for a fish. We were now tired and rowed ashore on one of the little islands to make a meal for ourselves, eat, and try to sleep. There were thousands of white terns that rose from the rocks and flew away with ear-deafening cries as we landed. It was the egg-laying season, and among the heather and dwarfed shrubbery there were many nests full of eggs laid by terns and other seafowl. While Peder gathered some dry heather for a fire, I took a pail and went to see if I could find some good eggs. I came to the nest of an eider duck that had 12 eggs in it. They were about as large as goose-eggs. Crushing one to see if they were fresh, I found them new laid. With the pail full of eggs I returned to where Peder had made the fire; and we proceeded to fry salmon and egg cakes and make coffee. Cream and butter we had a plenty. We were rather hungry after 12 to 15 hours of work, and with such eatables as we now had, it may well be understood this was a meal I can never forget. We ate until we were filled to the very neck. The outdoor air on the bird-inhabited islands seemed to aid the appetite. Then we found a little smooth, grass-grown spot, with a steep cliff on one side, against which the sun shone, and sheltered against the wind, the place was quite cozy and warm. Here we rolled up in the sail of our boat. Falling asleep at once, we slept well and long. It was about noon when we awoke; and I remember how hard it seemed to get up. It required extreme effort to get on our feet. All our lines and nets were out and we had to draw them. Gathering our outfit into the boat, and pulling all our lines and nets, we started for home under a pleasant little sea breeze.

Coming home along in the afternoon, our father was greatly pleased with our good fishing luck. Then we had the cleaning of fish to do. Father told us to try and dispose of most of the fish by sale, as it would be impossible for his small household to use but a small part before it became too old and too salty.

The next morning I was at the fish-market in Stavanger with more than a barrel of new salted fish, and I sold it in a short time, as there happened to be small supply of fish that day.

Whether it was a fitting occupation for a navigator to stand on the market place and sell fish I did not much care. It put some bright coins into my pocket; besides the fun we had on the fishingtrip. My expectant father-in-law caught all the fish they needed for domestic use and more, so they did not need any, and there was nothing to do for me but to sell what we had caught.

This was the greatest and most enjoyable fishing trip I have had in my life.