---
title: "A Perilous Adventure"
id: 58
start: "Summer, 1881"
ships:
  0: "unnamed coast-steamers"
places:
  0: "Malmö, Sweden"
note: "N.N. denotes \"Nomen nominadum\" - not named"
slug: "a-perilous-adventure"
hero:
  image: "/images/a-perilous-adventure.jpg"
---


But this story needs a few introductory remarks. I have been in doubt about including it in these reminiscences, but have come to the conclusion it cannot hurt anybody, as it happened so long ago, and nobody buy myself now knows anything about it. It may also serve to give a particular side view of a sailor's life. And it may reflect something of the adventures of the old vikings from Rogaland, where, it is told, they came home from their voyages sometimes bringing with them Swedish girls, whom they later married. It is said the Rogaland tribe is somewhat mixed with Swedish blood from olden days. There is also another thing. The Norwegian sailor boys were rated high among the Norwegian girls, and still higher among the Swedish girls. Among the latter the NOrwegian sailor boys were valued even higher than the Swedish. This fact I also have from their own mouths, both men and women. For this reason there was liable to be great jealousy on part of Swedish boys when Norwegian sailors came to Sweden and became interested in their girls. And I met many Norwegian sailors in foreign ports who were married to Swedish women. These latter have a way of making themselves infatuating. I hope I have not already let the cat out of the bag by these prefactory remarks.

Having bought a new strwahat in Copenhagen, I was wearing it. As soon as we were well out of that city I went up on the steamer's promenade deck to view the beautiful shores of Denmark. No one was there, and I walked forth and back for a while. Then, a lady came up on the other side and began to walk on that side. We were probably the only first-class passengers on board. She was a rather toll lady who, but dress and poise gave the impression she was of the better class. She appeared to be about 20 to 25 years old. It was not in my thought that I would enter into conversation with her, or become acquainted; because such a fine and apparently well-bred lady migh be offended by any approach that I would or could make.

We kept each on his own side of the ship. But I saw she occasionally looked over my way. That was nothing strange, as we were the only people there. She had the right to see and make up her mind as whom I might be. Then I happened to stop and turn to lean over the railing and look out over the water. She then walked across the deck to me, said 'Good morning' and asked: 'Does the gentleman believe it is likely to storm today?' 'No,' I said, 'There will be no storm here today.' Then she said, 'I only asked, bacause I get seasick in a storm.' I tried to console her as much as I could by repeating that I did not believe it would storm today. But then, to my surprise, she asked: 'Pardon me, but is the gentleman a sailor?' 'Yes, I am a sailor." 'And where is the gentleman going now?' I told her. She already knew I was a Norwegian, and asked me where my home was in Norway. Now I also became bold enough to ask where her home might be. She was from N. N., in Skaane, not far from Malmö. She had visited friends in Copenhagen for about a wekk. Now she was going home. I thought I spoke Swedish quite well in those days, and so continued the conversation with her in her own language. But she let me understand she also understood Norwegian well enough. It appeared that I had not been mistaken that she was a lady of good training and education, and she was a good conversationalist. Thinking her interesting, I naturally had no objection to keep the conversation going. But it was a little tiresome standing there leaning on the railing; so I ventured to ask: 'Would the lady drink a glass of beer?' 'Yes, thank you,' she said. I had feared she might say no. Then we went down into the salon, sat down at one of the tables, and I ordered a bottle of beer and two glasses which the water soon brought. No on elese was in the salon, except the waiter who was in attendance on his service. Now I had opportunity to look at her more closely. She was pretty of face, though not a very great beauty; black hair and eyelashes, and an unusually kindly appearing face. And she had a soft, but clear and aggreable voice. But what seemed most attractive about her was her straightforward, naive and confiding simplicity. There was no assumed sophistication of coquetry. She was so entirely different from the women sailors usually meet with in foreign lands, and of which there was everywhere and always an over-supply. These latter were mostly looking for the money of the men. One could easily distringuish such vampires from clean and good women. This lady, learning that I was going to New York, told me she had a brother whome she wanted me to look up, and bring him greetings. She gave me the address, but now she also wanted my address. I gave her that; and she gave me her address, and asked that I write her from Stralsund, about my safe arrival there; then she would write me. I was told that her father was a manufacturer in N.N.; and that she often thought of the men who sailed stormy seas, and faced dnagers of all kinds. Not much of the beer was drunk, but we were busy talking. In two or three hours we were at Malmö, and before we arrived there we seemed to be quite well acquainted. I had to take care of my baggage, and see that it was transferred to another boat, going to Stralsund. I looked for her when that was done, and there was an hour's waiting before that steamer pulled out. But she had disappeared. I reflected this had been a very pleasant trip from Copenhagen to Malmö, in company of such a fine lady.