---
title: "Sailing as 'Styrmann'"
id: 59
start: "Summer, 1881"
ships:
  0: "unnamed coast-steamers"
  1: "President Daae"
places:
  0: "Malmö, Sweden"
  1: "Stralsund, Germany"
slug: "sailing-as-styrmann"
hero:
  image: "/images/sailing-as-styrmann.jpg"
---


Toward evening I arrived in Stralsund. And the captain of the ship on which I was to sail, having been notified by telegram, met me at the steamer landing, and brought me to his ship. He was about fifty years old. We soon became good friends. Second mate was a young man, about twenty, whose home was at Tvedestrand. His folks were friends of the captain, who had taken him on for friendship's sake. he was of medium height, but stoutly built, so he could take a life when necessary, but the queer part of his appearanc was the heavy, long, red full beard he wore, that reached down almost to his waist. It made him appear at least thirty five years old. The carpenter was from Lillesand, about 25 or 30 years old, steady and able. Those three any myself were the only Norwegians on board. The rest were Germans, who had been hired there in Stralsund. The ship was stout and fine, and I liked it well. The comradeship in teh cabin soon became of the very best.

It took a day or two before we were ready to sail. I found time to write a letter to my recent Swedish acquaintance, as I had promised. I told her I was glad to have made her acquaintance, and thanked her for the pleasureable trip we had together, hoping our friendship might continue; and closed the letter by a few words on weather and wind, as usual.

It was not without a certain sense of sadness and regret that I now again left Scandinavia, and set course for the western ocean and America without visiting my folks at home. Now about 1-3/4 year had elapsed since I had seen them, and I really longed for home. But a sailor had to become accustomed to such things. And for that reason it was not to be wondered at that he looked for diversions, amusements and adventures. The monotonous life on sea was so tiresome that even a storm now and then seemed to be a relief and was welcome. For a second time I was now to pass near Norway, on our outward voyage, without a visit at the home of those who were daily in my thoughts.

Many experiences had come and gone since I left home. Four times Equator had been croseed; and I had been in the far East, under fierce heat and a broiling sun. Then back North, in snow, ice and fearful winter storms, three times having escaped shipwreck by good fortune. Then again southward, to the heat of the tropics, and to the far West. Now, again, I was in the North, but this time it was smiling summer, and the darkness of night was only a brief period of twilight.

How enjoyable it would be to be at home now in this bright and luminous summertime. What would happen before I returned to Norway, and when would it be? It would doubtless be winter before we could return, and I knew the north Atlantic would be very rought and disagreeable in winter. And whereto would we then be sent?Probably to the Baltic again, in storm, snow and ice. Whou could answer? Could it be wondered at that I was a little despondent? A sailor's life was truly a changeable, unsteady life in may respects. No peace; - he had to be at his post nigth and day, in storm and calme, and, when circumstances required, go without sleep for many days and night. Is it surprising that many an old tar complained bitterly when called out of bed in a storm ssuddenly striking in the night? It was, indeed, a wonder they did not complain worse than tehy did.

The German crew was a good lot, and not bad sailors. They understood a little English, and we understood a little German, so we got along pretty well. The steward was a middle aged man, of average size and weight, about 30 years old.

We were out in the North Sea, and had probably been at see 8 days. The weather was fine, but the wind was rather contrary, so we sailed slowly. I had noticed that the steward had not kept my berth in the cabin clean. Then, one morning about 6 o'clock, I was on day watch on deck, and I met the steward in the galley and asked him, in a friendly manner, why he did not clean my room. 'Have I anything to do with that?' he asked. 'I suppose you know it is your duty to keep the mates' as well as the captain's room clean.' I said. 'Why did you not say that before we left Stralsund,' he said. 'Because I expected you know your duties here without being told by me,' was my reply. I left him and walked aft. But I had only got a few paces away when I heard a call 'Steermann' (German for mate) behind me, and as I turned the steward struck me over the head with a club of some kind, so I saw starts in all directions, and I was about to fall to the deck. At that he came forward with knit fists, and was going to finish me. I had been knocked nearly unconscious, but as soon as my senses returned my anger also kindled. I took and held him, so he could not get hold of his club again. Now we had a dance around the eck and, as the old ssaing goes, 'the feathers flew' for a while. He was completely out of his right mind with anger, and he tried his best to get loose. I held him tight, and oaccasionally gave him a tump to knock a little sense into his head. Finally we came over against teh railing, where I got him on his back on deck, between the railing and a spar lying length-wise on deck. Then he began to realize it was not so easy to peep the fight going. He changed his tune at once, and asked me to release him and not do him any more harm, and he would go and clean out my room at once. I looked at him a while. His face was white and was somewhat bloody on one side. He looked so pitiable I could not deny him the privilege to show me he really meant to do what he said. Furthermore, I knew his strength by this time, so I was not afraid if he should renew his attack. I also thought he might try to use the club again, but if so, I was prepared for that. Then I let him up and he ran to the galley. I waited to see if he should come with some new weapon but, here he come with a broom and a dustpan, and ran for dear life toward our cabin and began cleaning. And when he was all through with that he took time to wash the blood from his face. After a while I found the club he had used, lying near the main mast. I threw it overboard. it was big and heavy enough so that he could easily have killed me with it by one well directed stroke. Whether he did not aim well enough or did not strike hard enough I do not know, but in any event, it was a murderous attack.

Remarkable enough, no on e was present on deck to see what happened. I believe they kept purposely absent, so they could not be called as winesses if the matter had come to be heard in court. The captain, second mate and carpenter, who were all on larboard watch, were asleep at the time. But when we ate breakfast, about 8 o'clock, I told the men in the cabin that the steward had tried to kill me about two hears earlier. The captain flew into a fit of anger, and asked: 'Did you give him a licking?' 'Yes', I said, 'I think he got enough.' 'Come,' he said, 'let us go up and give him some more,' he said, as he arose from the table. 'No,' I said, 'let him alone, I think he got enough.' 'Yes, but if he didn't get enough , I think he should get it now,' he said. I maintained he had been given all he needed. Let us leave him alone and see how he behaves.

But never have I been so surprised by sudden change in behaviour of any person as in the case of this steward. He became a voluntary slave to me. he was ever on the go to see what could be done to please me. It was really touching to see how concerned he was for my welfare. And when we came to New York, where all the other Germans deserted, he remained and continued in this ship as long as I did. Not even when we came back to Germany, and his time was up, would he muster out, but accompanied me to Norway, and was all the time my most loyal friend. He gave me a picture of himself when we parted, with a wish I would remember him in kindness; and that I have done to this day.