---
title: "The Birthday of the Captain's Wife"
id: 37
slug: "the-birthday-of-the-captains-wife"
hero:
  image: "/images/the-birthday-of-the-captains-wife.jpg"
---


The ship was in ballast, bound for Shields, England, there to load coal for [Rangoon, India](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yangon). The captain's wife was onboard, going as far as Shields, whence she would return to Norway. She was a good-looking and kindly lady, though much younger than the captain.

We got out to sea and the men were shown their positions. The weather was fair but the wind contrary and progress slow. It took all of a week to reach Shields. On the way there one of the days happened to be the birthday anniversary of the captain's wife. Then we were treated to a sumptuous dinner and other favors. The steward told us she had said: 'Poor boys; they have little else for joy onboard than something good to eat.' This was a demonstration of her kindly feelings and good heart, and since she was the daughter of the owner she could probably also order a treat for us without fear of objection from anybody. It must not be inferred that the food on this ship was ordinarily poor. It was good; but the birthday treat was something extra good in eats, such as we hardly ever served on board ship in those days. We joined in hearty expressions of gratitude, not only for the feast, but her appreciation of hte facts about monotony and the hard work of sailors, and for the long seasons of absence from friends and acquaintances that must be endured by mariners on lengthy voyages. We came to Shields and began to discharge the ballast.

The feeling of antipathy in the forecastle had not decreased, but one day, rather unexepected, it came to an open break. Sven had planned that I should exchange place at table with Jacobson, so they could be at the same table. This I was not willing to do, as I did not like taking orders from Sven. We were eating our noon meal one day. Sven had been criticised by an officer for some mistake in his duties during the forenoon. Then he came into the forecastle bristling with anger, especially against me, as he claimed he had been called down on my account. I had nothing to do with the affair, but Iunderstood this was his excuse for edging into a fight. He sat down at his table, while he belabored me with his mouth. There was a little locker located over his head in the upper corner of the room which contained some table ware and other personal belongings. There was something in that locker that I needed, and I reached up to get it. By so doing I had to extend my arm up over Sven's head. His cap, which he had on, had a large visor. When I reached up to the locker he stuck his head up and forward and his cap contacted my arm and fell off. At that he jumped up, grabbed me in the throat and said: 'Do you knock my cap off, you bondeknøl?' Now I understood the hour had struck Now the question of agreement or disagreement in the forecastle had to be settled once and for all. I grabbed his throat, jerked him up and out of his seat and threw him back in the opposite corner and there I forced him back and held him snug against the wall. I found he was surprisingly light weight. He could not reach me with his fists because my arms were longer than his, and I held him at arm's length. Then Jacobson came in and began to interfere, saying this would not do. He grabbed me by the shoulders, jerked me back, so I was on my back on the table at the side of the room, and Sven was on top of me. I did not, however, release my hold on him, and tried to hold him far enough away so he could not hurt me much. Jacobson apparently did not want to mix much further in the affray now, since Sven was on top of me he ought to win the fight. I noticed he felt the grip I had on his throat, and I fastened it a little tighter. He began to be blue in the face, and then I said: 'When you let go of me and let me alone I will let go of my grip on you, but not before.' At that I put on a little stronger pinch. By reason of his shorter arms he could do me very little harm, and I felt I had the advantage though I was underneath. It was only a question of time, and how long he could hold out. After a little he became entirely blue in the face and I noticed he was weakening; and finally he let go and got up. I also got up and kept ready for anything that might happen. But Sven went over and sat down by the table where he had been before. All the men were now present, watching the proceedings and all sat down to eat in ominous silence. It was as if there was a smell of powder in the forecastle and no one dared to say a word for fear it might be a spark to set off a charge, and if that happened no one could foretell the consequences. The preliminary skirmish was over, and it was now a question how to avoid a real battle the outcome of which seemed uncertain. The deep silence became somewhat oppresive; and as soon as I had eaten I got up and went slowly out on deck. Jacobson came out and began to give me a warning. 'You must look out for Sven. At home he is known as a fighting champion. He overcame three policemen in one fight, when they would arrest him. He is a dangerous chap.' I answered I did not care how many policemen he had beaten up. If he did not leave me (bondeknølen) alone, it would be his own undoing. 'You can tell him that from me.'

He probably thought his advice had been badly taken, but he said no ore. I understood he feared there would be more fighting.

Remarkably enough, from that day there was a different situation in the forecastle. All the fighting yearn of Sven had been literally knocked out of him, and we never heard 'bondeknøl' mentioned again.

There began now to be real comradeship among the men, although it took some time to entirely break down the party wall. After a while I began to understand it was the best thing that could have happened that Sven and I had a chance to test our strength. Now we knew each other better, and this had a salutary influence on all the other men. It was hardest for Sven to get over it, but gradually he grew more friendly, and eventually we became very good friends. We had not been more than a month out before there was as splendid a comradship in the forecastle as I have seen aboard any ship.

From the foregoing it will appear that it was not always easy to harmonize this situation among the men of the crew.From the foregoing it will appear that it was not always easy to harmonize this situation among the men of the crew.

When the ballast was out it took only a short time to run the ship full of coal. We took in 1,350 tons. A ship will carry more weight for a full load than its registered tonnage. We ccould ahve taken 1,500 tons, but for the length of the voyage. The ship will ordinarily travel faster with a light load, so what is lost in number of tons carried will be gained by reason of a quicker passage. The insurance contract also prevents taking too large a load.